Our focus in the Watchtower study article
is on how we can unleash
the power of God’s Word
when teaching from the platform.
But, you know, whether we’re teaching
in a congregation setting,
on a Bible study, or in the family,
isn’t it true that all of us,
brothers and sisters,
need to ‘pay constant attention
to ourselves and to our teaching’?
And we know why that’s so important
—because lives are at stake.
And all of us, younger or older,
touch the lives of other people.
So when we teach effectively,
we are giving opportunity to others
to attain the wisdom and the discernment
that God’s Word can give them.
That’s why we need to approach
any teaching opportunity
seriously and prayerfully.
Over 20 years ago, a kind elder gave me
some constructive counsel
after a public talk.
And then, with a warm smile, he said this,
“Remember, none of us teach like Jesus did.”
Well, I’ll never forget that counsel.
Why were those observations so helpful?
Well, it reminded me that when teaching,
our model needs to be Jesus,
the Great Teacher.
There’s more to learn from him.
And Jesus’ example reminds us of the need
to remain humble and diligent
students of Jehovah
—the Grand Instructor.
Though all of us are teachers on occasion,
isn’t it true that most often
the role we play during spiritual programs
is that of students?
Just for a moment, think about the many hours
we spend as students
—not teachers—
when we’re in the audience
at congregation meetings,
at assemblies, and at conventions.
Add to that the time we are students
when we buy out time to watch
the monthly broadcast,
to prepare for meetings,
to engage in family and personal study.
And then think of the added privilege
that many of us here have
—to enjoy morning worship five days a week.
You know, a typical program
of morning worship
lasts between 20 to 25 minutes.
If you multiply that by 5 days a week
and then by 52 weeks,
at a minimum, we are exposed
to at least 86 hours
of divine instruction each year.
But if we’re not careful,
some or much of that valuable instruction,
encouragement, and counsel
could just wash over us.
So for the remaining time
for our program this morning,
let’s consider some things all of us can do
to listen more effectively
at spiritual programs.
Please, for our first point, open your Bible
to Ezra 7:10,
and let’s consider Ezra’s example.
That’s Ezra 7:10,
and notice the reading carefully:
“Ezra had prepared his heart
“to consult the Law of Jehovah
“and to practice it,
“and to teach its regulations
and judgments in Israel.”
Now, if you have the Bible with the asterisk
next to “prepared his heart,”
if you tap on that, you’ll notice
that that could be rendered as
“had determined in his heart.”
Well, what do we learn from Ezra?
He had the right attitude
going into a period of study.
He had the right approach
to study and learning.
He recognized that it was Jehovah
who would be teaching him through His Law.
And as the verse goes on to say,
he first recognized
that he needed to personally practice
what he was learning.
Only then would he be in a rightful position
to effectively teach others.
Well, this scripture emphasizes the point
we’ve already made, doesn’t it?
Though we are teachers on occasion,
we are always first and foremost
students of God’s Word.
How can we imitate Ezra’s example
and prepare our hearts before study,
before attending a spiritual program
(whether here at Bethel
or in the congregation),
before watching a monthly broadcast?
Well, we need to prepare our hearts
by specifically praying to Jehovah,
recognizing him
as the Source of the teaching.
What should we pray specifically about?
Well, for one, we want to pray
that we remain humble
while listening to theocratic instruction.
We need to listen
—no matter how long
we’ve been in Jehovah’s classroom—
because none of us know it all,
nor will we ever know it all.
Proverbs 1:5 reminds us
that “a wise person listens
and takes in more instruction.”
Well, this leads to another question:
What if we find we have
a somewhat negative attitude
toward a certain presentation
—perhaps the material doesn’t interest us,
or we have a negative attitude
toward a certain brother
and his teaching ability?
What should we do?
Prepare our heart.
Pray to Jehovah
to recognize and appreciate
that the instruction is from him.
Pray to have a thankful spirit.
You know, back in 2002,
The Watchtower  made this helpful point
in an article that was entitled
“Pay More Than the Usual Attention.”
I quote: “Some may tend to gauge
the quality of a meeting
“by the teaching abilities
of the participants. . . .
“Though the teaching ability
of participants is important,
“it is not the sole factor contributing
to a meeting’s success.
“Do you not agree
that our prime concern should be,
“not how well the speaker delivers his talk,
“but how well we incline our ear?
When we attend meetings,”
the article continues,
“and pay attention
to what is being presented,
“we are worshiping God
in harmony with his will.
“That is what makes the meeting a success.
“If we are eager
to take in the knowledge of God,
“we will benefit from meetings,
regardless of a speaker’s abilities.”
What a beautiful reminder for all of us!
So our first point: Like Ezra,
let’s prepare our hearts with prayer,
as students who are determined to always
accept and apply
what Jehovah has to teach us.
Let’s consider a second point:
the need to focus our attention.
Have you faced the challenge
of staying focused
during spiritual programs?
Our minds may be distracted
with anxieties and many other things.
Noise and movements around us
could distract us.
If we’re watching morning worship
at a location other than
the Bethel dining room,
likely we well know the numerous distractions
that fight for our attention.
Some of us have ailments
and physical discomforts
that may make it difficult to concentrate.
Recently, a sister in our congregation
told us about her long-term battle
with migraine headaches.
I tried to put myself in her shoes,
having a migraine headache
while attending a spiritual program
—difficult to concentrate.
Well, whatever the case may be, we know
—we admit—
that there are many challenges
and distractions.
What can we do about it?
Well, since the eyes strongly influence
where we focus our attention,
the Benefit  book provides this suggestion:
“Use your eyes to help you concentrate
by keeping them on the speaker.
“When he cites a Bible text
—even a familiar one—
look it up, and follow along as he reads it.”
And then it said this:
“Resist the temptation to turn your head
“in the direction of every noise or movement.
“If the eyes are flooding your mind
with distracting information,
you will miss much
of what is presented from the platform.”
And think about, too,
the use of electronic devices.
Have you ever been alerted,
messaged, or e-mailed
while looking at the Bible on your device?
How wise it is when we turn
those devices to a mode
that eliminates unnecessary distractions!
Well, what about anxieties
or disquieting thoughts?
What could we do about that?
Well, here, again, is where we can remember
who the Grand Instructor is
and how close he can be to us
when we’re in a teaching environment.
Open, please, your Bible to Psalm 94:19
to recall what the psalmist said to Jehovah.
At Psalm 94:19,
we read:
“When anxieties overwhelmed me,
you [Jehovah] comforted and soothed me.”
What a beautiful reminder!
Jehovah can soothe and comfort us
when attending spiritual programs
so that we can focus
on what he’s teaching us.
Yes, spiritual programs
are a provision from him
—a spiritual lifeline.
So as needed during a spiritual program,
we should pray to Jehovah
to help us stay focused.
Pray repeatedly as needed.
Well, in summary, what have we learned?
All of us are teachers from time to time,
but first and foremost, we are students
in the classroom of the Great Teacher
and the Grand Instructor.
Like Ezra, humility and appreciation
should move us to ‘prepare our hearts’
before every spiritual program.
We don’t want to miss anything
that Jehovah has for us.
We’re determined ‘to consult that Law
so that we can practice it
and then teach it.’
And in view
of all the potential distractions,
let’s make it our aim to use
our eyes, our mind, and our heart
to focus attention on the goodness
of Jehovah’s spiritual provisions.